
                                             INTRODUCTION



         Chaos Game Representation is a new area in Bioinformatics which explore the graphical representation of biological sequences like DNA, RNA and Amino Acid.
 
  Chaos Game Representation was proposed as a scale-independent representation for genomic sequences by Jeffrey H. J in 1990. The technique, formally an iterative map, can be traced further back to the foundations of statistical mechanics, in particular to Chaos theory. The original proposition has been considerably expanded and generalized for sequences of arbitrary symbols and therefore including other biological sequences such as proteins.

    As an analogy, consider, English sentences or paragraphs or even a entire English novel. They are composed of only 26 alphabets, Likewise, DNA, the genetic material of any living organism is composed of only 4 alphabets, A, G, C, and T. Where, A stands for Adenine, G for Guanine, C for cytosine, and T for Thymine and these four are Nitrogen bases (nucleotides) which constitute DNA. Hence, the CGR of DNA consists of four nucleotides A, G, C, and T are assigned to the corners of a square. A nucleotide is represented as one point in the square. The first point corresponding to the first alphabet in the DNA sequence is plotted halfway between the centre of the square and the corner corresponding to the first alphabet (nucleotide) of the sequence and successive points plotted halfway between the previous point and the corner corresponding to the base of each successive sequence site.
On the other hand RNA is made out of DNA. And it is a main constituent in protein synthesis inside the living cell. RNA sequence is composed of A, G, C and ‘U’ instead of ‘T’ in DNA. Hence, the CGR of RNA consists of four nucleotides A, G, C, and U and they are assigned to the corners of a square. A nucleotide is represented as one point in the square. The first point corresponding to the first alphabet in the RNA sequence is plotted halfway between the centre of the square and the corner corresponding to the first alphabet (nucleotide) of the sequence and successive points plotted halfway between the previous point and the corner corresponding to the base of each successive sequence site.

  But, a Protein sequence on the other hand is composed of 20 amino acids. For the sake of ease, we can say it as, 20 alphabets. Since, the alphabets are more comparing to DNA/RNA, here we want to group it in to 4 , if the CGR plot shape is sqare. If the plot shape is triangle, then we want to group them into 3. and in the case of polygon, we want to group them according to the no of corners in the polygon. Hence our s/w should provide provisions for the user to select the plot shape to plot the sequence and also, the user can select any one of the four grouping strategy, mainly, by means of, hydrophobicity, or Water-oil ratio or Polarity, or Molecular weight of 20 amino acids, After getting these 2 values from the user, the algorithm should group them and plot the CGR of protein sequence.

    Every point of a CGR is a representation of sequence up to that position. There is a one to one correspondence between the subsequences and the points in the CGR. Since a base is always plotted in its quadrant, any sequence will always be plotted somewhere in the quadrant of its last base, and conversely any two points in the same quadrant must have the same last base. CGR possess lot of properties that make its sequence analyst’s favorite tool.
  
          SAT is a handy tool for those who are in sequence visualization and analysis for patterns, hot spots and discoveries. C-GRex packs a wide variety of exploration facilities using Chaos Game Representation in DNA, RNA and Protein sequences and any other sequence.
