
                                   Chaos Game Representation



         Chaos Game Representation (CGR) was proposed as a scale-independent representation for genomic sequences by Jeffrey in 1990 (Jeffrey, H. J. 1990). The technique, formally an iterative map, can be traced further back to the foundations of statistical mechanics, in particular to Chaos theory (Bar-Yam,1997). The original proposition has been considerably expanded and generalized for sequences of arbitrary symbols (Tino, 1999), and therefore including other biological sequences such as proteins (Basu et al., 1997; Pleißner et al., 1997).
Jeffry plotted CGR of Human Beta Globin Region on Chromosome 11 and noticed a double scoop in it. In 1993  Goldman pointed out that the double scoop is due to relative rarity of CG dinucleotides . (Goldman, 1993).  

 
           Three years after the original proposition, the translation of CGR quadrant frequencies into oligonucleotide frequencies was demonstrated and interpreted as an indication that ‘it is unlikely that CGRs can be more useful than simple evaluation of nucleotide, dinucleotide and trinucleotide frequencies’ (Goldman, 1993). So for several years, the possibility that the CGR format can be used for representing the nucleotide sequence as well as identifying the resulting sequence scheme had not been fully explored. In 2001 Almeida proved that the distribution of positions in the CGR plane are generalization of Markov chain probability tables that accommodates non-integer orders(Almeida 2001). This brought CGR to the main stream again. 

     In CGR representation for promoter, quadrants are taken as A is at position (0,0) G at position (1,0) T at position (1,1) and C at (0,1) which is different way of usual  A at(0,0) T at (1,0) G at(1,1) and C at(0,1) (Deschavanne PJ, Giron A, Vilain J, Fagot G, Fertil B. 1999). The reason for this variation is the AT rich and GC rich nature of the promoter region. The increase in their concentrations is represented as diagonals and can be easily observable. But in the standard case it is represented as bands and cannot be observed prominently.

  

 Properties of CGR

       In CGR the four nucleotides A, G, C, and T are assigned to the corners of a square.A is at position (0,0) G at position (1,0) T at position (1,1) and C at (0,1).  A nucleotide is represented as one point in the square. The first point plotted halfway between the centre of the square and the corner corresponding to the first nucleotide of the sequence and successive points plotted halfway between the previous point and the corner corresponding to the base of each successive sequence site. 

              Every point of a CGR is a representation of sequence up to that position.  For example in the CGR of the sequence “ATTGCAGGCT” the sixth point represents the sequence “ATTGCA”.  Thus there is a one to one correspondence between the subsequences and the points in the CGR. Since a base is always plotted in its quadrant, any sequence will always be plotted somewhere in the quadrant of its last base, and conversely any two points in the same quadrant must have the same last base.

	The number of different n-mers present in the sequence can be found by dividing the CGR square into sub-squares of side 2-n  . The notion of quadrant is recursive; each quadrant can be divided into quadrants, etc.  CGR points can be generated by an iterated function system defined by the following equations
Xi   =  0.5  (Xi-1+ gix)                                    
Yi  =   0.5  (Yi-1 +giy)			 
where gix and giy correspond to the X and Y co-ordinates of the nucleotide at position i in the sequence. 
     The CGR has a fractal nature. A fractal is a geometric object which is rough or irregular on all scales of length, and so which appears to be 'broken up' in a radical way. Fractals are said to possess infinite detail, and they may actually have a self-similar structure that occurs at different levels of magnification. The plot of entire genome of an organism and 100Kb of the genome will have the same pattern for the CGR. Because of this property the CGR can be treated as Genome signatures. It can be used to identify unknown DNA fragments. Horizontal transfers in the genome can easily be identified.  
 
